== Developers

- <b>John Croisant</b> / jacius 
  Email:: jacius at gmail.com
  Role::  Creator; primary developer
  Date::  2004 - present

== Past Developers

- <b>Ash Wilson</b> / smashwilson
  Email:: smashwilson at gmail.com
  Role::  Assistant developer
  Date::  2007 - 2008

- <b>Roger Ostrander</b> / denor
  Email:: atiaxi at gmail.com
  Role::  Assistant developer
  Date::  2007 - 2008

- <b>Rusterholz Stefan</b> / apeiros
  Email:: apeiros at gmx.net
  Role::  Assistant developer
  Date::  2007 - 2008

- <b>Bjorn De Meyer</b> / beoran
  Email:: beoran at gmail.com
  Role::  Assistant developer
  Date::  Nov 2007 - 2008

== Other Source Contributors

- <b>Randy Eckenrode</b>
  Email::         randy.eckenrode at gmail.com
  Contribution::  Patch to improve Win32 compatibility (memory allocation,
                  extconf.rb improvements, misc. other changes).
  Date::          received 2006-01-19; applied 2006-02-04 (r143).

- <b>Yun, Jonghyouk</b> / ageldama
  Email::         ageldama at gmail.com
  Contribution::  Patch to add TTF#render_utf and TTF#render_unicode methods;
                  UTF8 demo application.
  Date::          received 2007-03-04; applied 2007-04-13 (r235).

- <b>Johan Berntsson</b>
  Email::         johan at microheaven.com
  Contribution::  Patch to add Mixer::Music class (music playback).
  Date::          2007-04-27 (r304).

- <b>Daniel Neis Araujo</b> / danielneis
  Email::         danielneis at gmail.com
  Contribution::  Patch to add Sprite#undraw (based on UpdateGroup#undraw).
  Date::          2007-07-29 (r460).

- <b>ippa</b>
  Email::         admin at rubylicio.us
  Contribution::  Patch to optimize Rect#collide_rect?
  Date::          2007-11-21 (r595)

- <b>Michael Swiger</b> / mokkan
  Email::         mokkan at users.sourceforge.net
  Contribution::  Patch to add Screen.icon=
  Date::          2007-11-21 (r597)

- <b>Elio Cuevas Gómez</b> / elcugo
  Email::         elcugo at gmail.com
  Contribution::  Patch to fix color conversion segfault on x86_64.
  Date::          2008-07-31

- <b>Tyler Church</b>
  Email::         tylertrain at yahoo.com
  Contribution::  Patch to add Rubygame.get_key_state
                  (now Rubygame.pressed_keys)
  Date::          2010-09-06
