Note: You can view the latest version of this guide online at the
Rubygame wiki: http://rubygame.org/wiki/Mac_Installation_Guide

== Installing Xcode

Rubygame does not need to be compiled anymore (since version 2.6),
but you will need to install the Xcode development tools in order
to install the dependencies with Fink or Darwinports, as well as
to compile rsdl.

You can find Xcode on your Mac OS X installation disc. Or, you can
download Xcode online. You must register for a (free) Mac developer
account for this.

* Mac OS X 10.5 (Leopard) and 10.6 (Snow Leopard):
  {Xcode 3.1}[https://connect.apple.com/cgi-bin/WebObjects/MemberSite.woa/wa/getSoftware?bundleID=20414]

* Mac OS X 10.3 (Panther) and 10.4 (Tiger):
  {Xcode 2.5}[http://connect.apple.com/cgi-bin/WebObjects/MemberSite.woa/wa/getSoftware?bundleID=19907]

== Installing dependencies...

You have two options for installing the software libraries that
Rubygame depends on: Fink or Darwinports. Which option you choose is
just a matter of preference.

=== ...with {Fink}[http://www.finkproject.org/]

1. {Install Fink}[http://www.finkproject.org/download/index.php?phpLang=en]
   and update to the latest version.
2. Open a new terminal (can be found in /Applications/Utilities).
3. Install SDL:

     sudo apt-get install sdl

4. (Optional, but *highly* recommended:) Install the SDL companion
   libraries:

     sudo apt-get install sdl-gfx13 sdl-image sdl-mixer sdl-ttf

Thanks to Matt Crinklaw for these instructions.

=== ...with {Darwinports}[http://darwinports.com/]

1. {Install Darwinports}[http://darwinports.com/download/] (you must
   register first).
2. Open a new terminal (can be found in /Applications/Utilities).
3. Install SDL:

     sudo port install libsdl

4. (Optional, but *highly* recommended:) Install the SDL companion
   libraries:

     sudo port install libsdl_gfx libsdl_image libsdl_mixer libsdl_ttf

Thanks to Raffael Mancini (sepisultrum) for these instructions.

== Installing rsdl

In order to use Rubygame applications on Mac OS X, you must use a special wrapper for the Ruby interpreter, called rsdl.

1. {Get rsdl}[http://github.com/knu/rsdl].
2. From within the rsdl directory:

     ruby ./configure.rb
     make
     sudo cp rsdl /usr/local/bin/

== Installing Rubygame

The simplest way to install Rubygame is: <code>gem install rubygame</code>

Or you can {download the source
from Github}[http://github.com/jacius/rubygame/] and follow the installation instructions in README.

== Running an application

If all went well, you can now run Rubygame applications like so: 

    rsdl a_rubygame_app.rb

If you have any trouble installing Rubygame, please post in the
{forums}[http://rubygame.org/forums/].
